
BayesPy provides tools for Bayesian inference with Python.  The user
may construct a model as a Bayesian network, observe data and run
posterior inference.  Currently, only variational Bayesian inference
for conjugate-exponential family (variational message passing) has
been implemented.  Future work includes variational approximations for
other types of distributions and possibly other approximate inference
methods such as expectation propagation, Laplace approximations,
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) and other methods.

Project information
-------------------

Copyright (C) 2011-2012 Jaakko Luttinen, Aalto University

BayesPy including the documentation is licensed under Version 3.0 of
the GNU General Public License. See LICENSE file for a text of the
license.

* Home page: https://github.com/jluttine/bayespy

* Documentation: http://bayespy.readthedocs.org or at docs/ directory

* Repository: https://github.com/jluttine/bayespy.git

* Mailing list: bayespy@googlegroups.com

* IRC: #bayespy @ `freenode <http://freenode.net/>`_

* Maintainer: Jaakko Luttinen jaakko.luttinen@aalto.fi

Similar projects
----------------

`VIBES <http://vibes.sourceforge.net/>`_
(http://vibes.sourceforge.net/) allows variational inference to be
performed automatically on a Bayesian network.  It is implemented in
Java and released under revised BSD license.

`Bayes Blocks <http://research.ics.aalto.fi/bayes/software/>`_
(http://research.ics.aalto.fi/bayes/software/) is a C++/Python
implementation of the variational building block framework.  The
framework allows easy learning of a wide variety of models using
variational Bayesian learning.  It is available as free software under
the GNU General Public License.

`Infer.NET <http://research.microsoft.com/infernet/>`_
(http://research.microsoft.com/infernet/) is a .NET framework for
machine learning.  It provides message-passing algorithms and
statistical routines for performing Bayesian inference.  It is partly
closed source and licensed for non-commercial use only.

`PyMC <https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc>`_
(https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc) provides MCMC methods in Python.
It is released under the Academic Free License.

`OpenBUGS <http://www.openbugs.info>`_ (http://www.openbugs.info) is a
software package for performing Bayesian inference using Gibbs
sampling.  It is released under the GNU General Public License.

